Case by: Yair Glick
Diagnosis Certain
Diagnosis: Atelectasis

Patient Data: 
Age - 20
Gender - Male

Patient Presentation: Drowned in the sea

Description: Properly placed ventilation tube. Coarse bilateral perihilar 
nodulointerstitial opacities.

1 day later: Subclavian line on right, its tip projected over the SVC. 
Mild interstitial thickening - considerable improvement.

3 days later: There is a large opacity in the right hemithorax. 
The mediastinum and the heart are pulled to the right. Most probably 
collapse of both right lower lobe and right middle lobe.

4 days later: CXR 1 day later after respiratory physioRx

Beside the properly placed double-lumen right subclavian line, there is a 
right jugular single-lumen line that ends adjacent to the 2nd rib.

Bilateral interstitial edema but the right lung atelectasis has cleared.

Case Discussion: Young male, history remarkable for thalassemia minor and 
heavy smoking. The lifeguard reported that the patient had been submerged 
for about 3 minutes. Pulled out of the water unconscious, not breathing and 
pulseless. Received prompt CPR on the spot for 10 minutes till return of 
pulse. Ventilated on the spot. Taken to nearby hospital. At the ER: 
unconscious, tachycardic, ventilated, pupils unresponsive to light, 
recurring seizures. Very severe metabolic and respiratory acidosis: pH 6.58, 
pCO2 92 mmHg, base excess -26 mmol/L, bicarbonate 3.8 mmol/L. Treated with 
toxoid and transferred to the ICU in critical condition, APACHE II score of 
28.

On admission to the ICU: GCS 3TS, narrow pupils unresponsive to light, no 
corneal reflex, no oculocephalic reflex. Received pressure-controlled 
ventilation (PCV) and treated with IV fluids, nutrition via NGT, ranitidine, 
 enoxaparin (to prevent DVT), and empiric ceftriaxone. Treated for status 
epilepticus with midazolam, propofol, phenytoin, and even required 
thiopentone. The seizures stopped. Received norepinephrine for hypotension. 
Two days later, sedation was discontinued.

RLL atelectasis: Deterioration in ventilatory status 6 days into admission. 
Chest x ray showed complete RLL atelectasis. Significant clinical and 
radiological improvement after receiving high PEEP and respiratory 
physiotherapy.

Link: https://radiopaedia.org/cases/91903