Case by: Ashesh Ishwarlal Ranchod
Diagnosis Certain
Diagnosis: Pulmonary pseudotumor
-COPD
-Bibasal effusions

Patient Data: 
Age - 60
Gender - Male

Patient Presentation: Known HIV-positive patient with COPD. Ongoing 
anti-retroviral therapy and tuberculosis treatment. Presents with 
hemoptysis and septicemia.

Description: Hyperinflated lung fields are consistent with a known history 
of COPD. The trachea is central, with a tracheostomy in situ. The 
cardiomediastinal contour is normal.

There is a large, elliptiform, mass-like left hemithoracic opacity with 
sharp borders. There is no cavitation, no associated air-fluid level, no 
calcification, and no overlying rib erosion.

There is apical bronchovascular distortion consistent with previous 
pulmonary tuberculosis. There are bibasal effusions.

There is a left subclavian access CVP with overlying ECG leads.

The lateral view is absent, in keeping with a portable and intensive care 
setting.

Day 10 : Follow-up X-rays on day 10 demonstrate a progression of parenchymal 
changes and a static appearance of the left pseudotumor. There is some 
resolution of the basal effusions.

Day 17:On day 17, there are resolving parenchymal infective changes, 
improving left pseudotumor, and resolving bibasal pleural effusions.

Day 25: On day 25, the left encysted fluid has significantly resorbed, and 
the pleural pseudotumor appears much smaller. The bibasal pleural 
effusions have totally resolved with a sharper diaphragmatic contour and 
normal cardiophrenic and costophrenic recesses. Residual chronic 
parenchymal changes in a setting of known COPD.

Case Discussion: A case of a large, left pleural pseudotumor due to left 
oblique fissural encysted pleural fluid with bibasal pleural effusions. 
The pleural pseudotumor progressively resorbed over a lengthy ICU stay and 
improved without any percutaneous or surgical drainage.

There is known COPD, with recurrent pulmonary tuberculosis on ongoing 
treatment. The patient is HIV-positive and on highly active antiretroviral 
therapy (HAART).

Link: https://radiopaedia.org/cases/176701

