Case by: Priya Parikh
Diagnosis Certain
Diagnosis:Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy - neonatal

Patient Data:
Age - 37 week old
Gender - Male

Patient Presentation:Ex 37 weeker baby boy, infant of diabetic mother born 
via C-section with respiratory distress. 

Description: 1. Initial XR chest evaluation demonstrates moderately severe 
cardiomegaly with mild to moderate diffuse pulmonary vascular congestion 
and mild to moderate pulmonary interstitial edema.

2. ​There is slight asymmetric increased opacification of the left lung 
field likely due to dependent edema. ​

3.  No definite effusion or pneumothorax. No osseous anomaly.

4. The orogastric tube courses into the stomach.

ETT- 
1. ETT terminates at T1 level. OG tube courses into the stomach. 
UVC is seen terminating in the low right atrium.

2. Mild improved bilateral lung aeration. Now noted is increased diffuse 
haziness mainly in the left upper and midzone, most likely due to 
asymmetric pulmonary edema.

3. Stable moderately severe cardiomegaly and pulmonary interstitial edema.

4. No definite effusion or pneumothorax. No osseous anomaly.

Case Discussion: Full-term infant of a diabetic mother born via C-section with 
respiratory distress and a systolic murmur. Initial chest x-ray demonstrated 
moderately-severe cardiomegaly and pulmonary vascular congestion and 
interstitial edema. An echocardiogram was performed which confirmed marked 
biventricular hypertrophy in addition to other cardiac findings including 
hypertrophied interventricular septum (thickness measuring 9 mm), dilated 
coronary arteries and narrowed aortic isthmus.  

Infants of diabetic mothers are at increased risk for cardiac valvular and 
septal lesions in addition to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In a large 
retrospective study, the prevalence of cardiovascular malformations in 
infants of diabetic mothers approached 4%, compared to less than 1% in 
babies with non-diabetic mothers 1.

The incidence of symptomatic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is reported to be 
as high as 12.1% of infants with diabetic mothers 2. Other associated 
findings include left ventricular outflow tract obstruction and reduced 
stroke volume 4. Septal enlargement and hypertrophy are secondary to fetal 
hyperinsulinemia.

Link: https://radiopaedia.org/cases/63314