Case by: Bruno Di Muzio
Diagnosis Certain
Diagnosis: Epithelioid mesothelioma

Patient Data: 
Age - 70
Gender - Male

Patient Presentation: Chest pain and shortness of breath

Description: There is diffuse left hemithorax nodular pleural thickening 
encasing the lung and with, perhaps, some left hemithorax volume loss. A 
component of pleural effusion cannot be excluded. Three small coils projected 
within the left hemithorax infer previous surgical intervention. The right 
lung and pleural space are clear. Enlarged left paratracheal stripe either 
represents lymphadenopathy or pleural mass component. 

Chasing for previous imaging or further CT recommended. 

Case Discussion: This patient was known to have confirmed pleural malignancy 
followed up in another service. 

He has previous left VATS: Macroscopy: Labeled "Left pleural rind biopsy".  
2 fragments of fatty tissue bearing an incomplete smooth pale grey lining 8 
x 5 x 3 mm and 14 x 9 x 5 mm.  Inked, serially sliced.

Microscopy: The biopsy fragments show fibroadipose connective tissue with 
surface fibrinous exudate. Within the submesothelial stroma, there is a 
proliferation of atypical epithelioid mesothelial cells forming small nests, 
trabeculae, and tight acinar arrangements. These cells have moderately 
pleomorphic nuclei with prominent nucleoli and there are scattered mitotic 
figures. A sclerotic stromal reaction is present. The surrounding pleural 
tissue shows features of fibrous pleuritis with mild chronic inflammation. 
No alveolated lung tissue is included. Atypical cells do not extend into the 
adipose.
Immunoperoxidase stains have been performed on the mesothelial cells show 
positive staining for calretinin and CK 5/6, with no staining for EMA.
The findings are suspicious for malignant mesothelioma, however, the presence 
of adjacent fibrous pleurisy and the absence of invasion into the adipose 
tissue precludes a definite diagnosis.

Conclusion: Left pleural rind biopsy: Atypical mesothelial proliferation, 
suspicious for but not diagnostic of mesothelioma.

A second opinion from a different pathologist: features are in keeping with 
malignant mesothelioma, epithelioid subtype. 

Link: https://radiopaedia.org/cases/75229