Example of "Atelectasis"

Diagnosis: Large pneumothorax
-Left lower lung zone atelectasis

Patient Presentation: Chest pain post chest tube removal.

Description:  Large right-sided pneumothorax with complete collapse of the 
right lung without significant mediastinal shift.

2. Minimal left lower lung zone atelectasis. No discrete focal 
consolidation, effusion or pneumothorax on the left.

3. The heart and central pulmonary vascularity appear normal.

4. No acute osseous findings. No free air in the upper abdomen.

Case Discussion: Pneumothorax is the presence of air in the pleural space 
accompanied with collapse or atelectasis of the lung. The collection of air 
may compress the mediastinal structures and result in tension pneumothorax 
which is a true emergency requiring urgent needle thoracostomy or chest 
tube placement. With no tension present it is referred to as simple 
pneumothorax. Causes of pneumothorax varies and can be categorized into 
primary, secondary, and iatrogenic or traumatic.


Example of "Calcifications"

Diagnosis: Calcified anterior mediastinal nodes (post-radiotherapy)

Patient Presentation: Known cardiac dysfunction, worsening SOB and ankle 
swelling, any features of pulmonary edema?

Description: No overt pulmonary edema or focal consolidation / collapse. 
Normal heart size.

Densely calcified masses in the anterior mediastinum. No evidence on CXR of 
previous pulmonary TB.

Case Discussion: The patient had a history of Hodgkin lymphoma as a teenager, 
treated with radiotherapy. The large calcifed mediastinal nodes are secondary 
to this treatment.


Example of "Cardiomegaly"

Diagnosis: Cardiogenic lung edema (pediatric)

Patient Presentation: Known Down syndrome and complete AV septal defect 
verified by echocardiography. Fever, reduced blood oxygen saturation, 
tachy-dyspnea.

Description: Marked cardiomegaly as a consequence of the complete AV septal 
defect. 

Bilateral irregular, partially confluous, diffuse haziness showing a 
perihilar and right-sided predominance.

Partial effacement of the diaphragm contours. 

Presence of air bronchograms. 

Case Discussion: The observed marked cardiomegaly and perihilar (bat wing) 
opacities are in line with cardiogenic lung edema, as a sequela of the 
complete AV septal defect.

Considering the clinical picture the more confluous areas of consolidations 
also raise the possibility of superimposed pneumonia. 



Example of "COPD"
Diagnosis: Severe emphysema

Patient Presentation: Known emphysema. Severe SOB.

Description: Severe bilateral emphysema with large volume bullous disease 
in the right upper and left lower lobes.

Segmental collapse of the right middle lobe.

Heart size normal.

Case Discussion: This case illustrates a case of severe bullous emphysema.  

The greatest merit of the case is in illustrating the impact that bullous 
emphysema or other structural lung disease has on VQ scan appearances and 
one's ability to interpret if a pulmonary embolism is present.


Example of "Lung Nodules"
Diagnosis: Sclerotic rib lesion simulating a pulmonary nodule

Patient Presentation: Recent TAVI (transcatheter aortic valve implantation)

Description: Nodule projected in the left mid zone. Note how the nodule 
"moves" relative to the lung but remains directly associated with the 
anterior aspect of the left fourth rib on both the PA and AP projections. 
This indicates that the lesion is associated with the rib which is 
confirmed when looking back at the prior TAVI planning CT. 

Case Discussion: Sclerotic rib lesions can mimic pulmonary nodules. The key 
is to look back at any prior radiographs. If the nodule remains projected 
over exactly the same rib site despite projectional differences then you 
can be confident that the lesions is within the rib rather than the lung.