Case by: Rayyan Mardhiyah
Diagnosis Almost Certain
Diagnosis: AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma

Patient Data: 
Age - 30
Gender - Male

Patient Presentation:A retroviral disease patient presented with a two-month 
history of fever, cough and loss of weight and appetite. Multiple 
purple-brown papules noted over head, scalp, neck, and trunk.

Description: Frontal chest radiograph showed reticular opacities and 
multiple parenchymal lung nodules.

2 months later: There is worsening reticular opacities in perihilar 
distributions and increasing size of the multiple lung nodules over a two 
month period -- initially treated as pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PJP).

Case Discussion: Histopathologic examination confirmed Kaposi Sarcoma. 

This patient has disseminated Kaposi Sarcoma (skin, lung, visceral and gut). The patient developed persistent episodes of diarrhea and a colonoscopy revealed multiple erythematous fungating lesions, extending from the rectum to cecum. After the patient started chemotherapy his condition improved, however after few months he succumbed to severe metabolic acidosis and hyperkalemia with multiple organ dysfunction.

There are four variants of Kaposi Sarcoma:

classic form
endemic form (african)
iatrogenic (organ transplant related)
AIDS-related Kaposi Sarcoma
with the two latter form being the most common and disseminated form 1. 

Kaposi Sarcoma is caused by Human Herpes Virus type 8 1.

AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma is highly associated with patient who are male 
and homosexual and virus usually transmitted from the anal sexual 
intercourse 1. 

In this disseminated form, commonly involved organs include

1) Head & neck

cutaneous form with skin, face and neck nodules 1. 
mucosal form ( intra-oral, laryngeal and pharyngeal nodules 1. 
2)  Thoracic                        

CT has certain characteristic findings compared to chest radiograph with 
flame shape appearance of lung nodules (bilateral symmetrical ill defined 
nodules in peribronchovascular distributions 1). 

These nodules may presented with "halo" sign: ground glass opacities 
surrounding the nodules. Other associated findings include 
peribronchovascular and interlobular septal thickening, fissural nodularity, 
mediastinal, hilar and axillary adenopathy 1.

3) Liver & Spleen

Multiple hypo-attenuating nodules. Nodules may exhibit delayed enhancement 
distinguishing it from multiple hemangiomas 1. Lesions should be hyperechoic 
on ultrasound scan. 

4) Gastrointestinal tract

Can affect gastrointestinal tract from oropharynx to the rectum. Biopsy may 
be negative as it is a submucosal lesion 1.

In this case, with the abdominal findings, other differential diagnoses 
that were considered included fungal lesions in view of the liver and 
spleen lesions with concurrent intra-abdominal TB. He was treated for 
opportunistic infection with fungal (amphotericin) and challenge with TB 
treatment before he was subjected for anti-retroviral therapy (ART) and 
chemotherapy. The initial chest radiograph was confused with PJP but the CT 
findings were characteristic for KS with absence of pleural effusion which 
may be present in PJP.

Link: https://radiopaedia.org/cases/85247

