Case by: Bruno Di Muzio
Diagnosis Certain
Diagnosis: Epithelioid mesothelioma
-Round Atelectasis

Patient Data: 
Age - 70
Gender - Male

Patient Presentation: History of thoracic aortic aneurysm on surveillance. 
Presenting with new AF.

Description: Cardiomediastinal contour is normal. When compared to prior 
imaging (not shown), persistent blunting of the right costophrenic recess 
is in keeping with longstanding pleural thickening. Ill-defined opacities 
in the right mid to lower zone with known round atelectasis.  No evidence 
of acute pulmonary edema. The left pleural space is clear.

Case Discussion: This patient has a known background of previous asbestos 
exposure and longstanding calcified and soft tissue pleural plaques. He had 
previous imaging in the past showing chronic round atelectasis in the right 
lung base and was under surveillance at vascular surgery due to an aortic 
arch aneurysm.

CTA showed a pleural mass and thoracic and extra-thoracic lymphadenopathy. 
Given the location of the mass and previous exposure to asbestos, the 
possibility of mesothelioma was raised. 

US-guided core biopsy was performed: 

Macroscopy: Labeled "Right pleural lesion 16G core biopsy". Core biopsy 19 
mm.

Microscopy: The biopsy core consists entirely of malignant tumor formed by 
partly necrotic sheets of atypical epithelioid cells. Tumor cells have 
moderately pleomorphic nuclei with prominent nucleoli and a moderate amount 
of eosinophilic cytoplasm. No glandular or papillary arrangements are seen 
and there is no keratinization.
Immunostains have been performed and the tumor cells have the following 
immune profile:
Positive: HBME1, CK5/6 (patchy), calretinin (weak and focal), CK7 
(a small minority of cells only).
Negative: TTF1.

Additional immunostains have been performed and the tumor cells show strong 
positive staining for mesothelial markers EMA and WT1 and do not stain with 
the squamous marker p40. These findings support the original diagnosis of 
malignant mesothelioma. 

Conclusion: Right pleural lesion, core biopsy: Epithelioid mesothelioma.

After MDM discussion (Stage IV T2 cN1 M1 (extra-thoracic lymph node), this 
patient was offered chemotherapy (Carboplatin/pemetrexed). 

Link: https://radiopaedia.org/cases/64658